KEP-3328: add field queueName to the spec of Job (#3397)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/3328-add-queueName-to-jobSpec/README.md

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> This KEP aims to add a new field `queueName` to the spec of Job which helps unifying the
> queue API in Job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This KEP aims to add a new field `queueName` to the Job spec that out-of-tree queue controllers can use to do job queueing.
```

in core Kubernetes. We can see similar implementations in other batch systems outside the Kubernetes,
e.g. in [Kubeflow](https://github.com/kubeflow/kubeflow),
we can specify the queue name of the distributed training job in [`SchedulingPolicy`](https://github.com/kubeflow/common/blob/21f5ba8833a2e21df17601497a08396c9bae9ab2/pkg/apis/common/v1/types.go#L202-L209)
We can also found the same implementation in [kubedl](https://github.com/kubedl-io/kubedl),
another project helps to run deep learning workloads.

[Kueue](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue), a Kubernetes native Job queueing management is also
calling out this feature. Currently a Kubernetes Job references to the kueue via the annotation,
which is not native.

So it's a good choice to support queueName in Job API, which helps to unify the usage for batch users.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
- Add a new field `queueName` to the spec of Job

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

> - How to integrate with non-Kubernetes native Job controllers, e.g. TFJob Operator

Reviewer: Also important to add as non-goal an implementation in kubernetes that uses the field.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

> Add a new field `queueName` to the spec of Job to unify the usage of batch users.

Reviewer: Should we provide a server-side filter based on queueName, like we do for Pod.spec.nodeName? Although I'm not sure how useful it is. We don't need it in kueue.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1
I'm going to develop a queue controller which helps me to manage the Jobs in resource quota,
multi-tenant, and execution sequence. The feature supports of current Job API is excellent,
but I found it's not graceful to bind the Jobs to the queue, the easiest way is via the annotation.
I hope we have a native way tying them together.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

> None

Reviewer: You can mention the similarity of this API with Pod.spec.schedulerName

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> None.

Reviewer: I would put as a risk that users might think that kubernetes does something with the queue name. And that is solved through documentation.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> Add a new field to `JobSpec` as blow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new field to `JobSpec` as below:
```

```golang
type JobSpec struct {
  // ...

  // QueueName specifies the queue that Job will be enqueued to. Defaults to nil.
  // ALPHA: This field is in alpha and must be enabled via the `JobQueueName` feature gate.
  // +optional

>   QueueName *string `json:"queueName,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,9,opt,name=queueName"`

Reviewer 2: Are you planning to inject that field into job's pods through annotation, for example? Or just expose in the spec and that's it? If it's the latter what's wrong with sticking with current kueue's approach of using annotation?

>   QueueName *string `json:"queueName,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,9,opt,name=queueName"`

Reviewer: Is there going to be any validation to the field? Otherwise there is really no difference from an annotation

well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: JobQueueName
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->
None.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->
Yes.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

> Nothing special, works as expected.

Reviewer 2: The new field will be cleared, no?

      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->
N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->
- 2022.06.15: KEP proposed for review, including motivation, proposal, risks,
test plan and graduation criteria.

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->
N/A

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

> Specifying the queue name via annotation also works but not native.

Reviewer: and what's the problem of it not being native? Maybe you can mention validation.

-->
N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->
- 2022.06.15: KEP proposed for review, including motivation, proposal, risks,
test plan and graduation criteria.

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->
N/A

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->
Specifying the queue name via annotation also works but we can't validate the

> naming legitimacy. What's more, queue name should be immutable when Job corresponding

Reviewer: I don't see validation or immutability in the design details. But I'm not convinced immutability is necessary when the Job didn't start yet.
